Start of answer for SO 4474-5677
Flexible array members can lead to undefined behaviour

----

In principle, I'm not dreadfully concerned about the C99 standard and
its corrigenda; they're not the current standard.
However, the evolution of the specification of flexible array members is
informative.

The C99 standard — ISO/IEC 9899:1999 — had 3 technical corrigenda:

* TC1 released on 2001-09-01 (7 pages),
* TC2 released on 2004-11-15 (15 pages),
* TC3 released on 2007-11-15 (10 pages).

It was TC3, for example, that stated that `gets()` was obsolescent and
deprecated, leading to it being removed from the C11 standard.

The C11 standard — ISO/IEC 9899:2011 — has one technical
corrigendum, but that simply sets the value of two macros accidentally
left in the form _`201ymmL`_ — the values required for
`__STDC_VERSION__` and `__STDC_LIB_EXT1__` were corrected to the value
`201112L`.
(You can see the TC1 — formally "ISO/IEC 9899:2011/Cor.1:2012(en)
Information technology — Programming languages — C TECHNICAL
CORRIGENDUM 1" — at
https://www.iso.org/obp/ui/#iso:std:iso-iec:9899:ed-3:v1:cor:1:v1:en.
I've not worked out how you get a download of it, but it is so simple
that it really doesn't matter very much.

### C99 standard on flexible array members

ISO/IEC 9899:1999 (before TC2) §6.7.2.1 ¶16:

> As a special case, the last element of a structure with more than one
named member may have an incomplete array type; this is called a
_flexible array member_.
With two exceptions, the flexible array member is ignored.
First, the size of the structure shall be equal to the offset of the
last element of an otherwise identical structure that replaces the
flexible array member with an array of unspecified length.<sup>106)</sup>
Second, when a `.` (or `->`) operator has a left operand that is (a
pointer to) a structure with a flexible array member and the right
operand names that member, it behaves as if that member were replaced
with the longest array (with the same element type) that would not make
the structure larger than the object being accessed; the offset of the
array shall remain that of the flexible array member, even if this would
differ from that of the replacement array.
If this array would have no elements, it behaves as if it had one
element but the behavior is undefined if any attempt is made to access
that element or to generate a pointer one past it.

> <sup>126)</sup> The length is unspecified to allow for the fact that
> implementations may give array members different alignments according
> to their lengths.

(This footnote is removed in the rewrite.)
The original C99 standard included one example:

> ¶17 EXAMPLE Assuming that all array members are aligned the same,
> after the declarations:

>     struct s { int n; double d[]; };
>     struct ss { int n; double d[1]; };

> the three expressions:

>     sizeof (struct s)
>     offsetof(struct s, d)
>     offsetof(struct ss, d)

> have the same value. The structure struct s has a flexible array member d.

> ¶18 If sizeof (double) is 8, then after the following code is executed:

>     struct s *s1;
>     struct s *s2;
>     s1 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 64);
>     s2 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 46);

> and assuming that the calls to malloc succeed, the objects pointed to by s1 and s2 behave as if the
identifiers had been declared as:

>     struct { int n; double d[8]; } *s1;
>     struct { int n; double d[5]; } *s2;

> ¶19 Following the further successful assignments:

>     s1 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 10);
>     s2 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 6);

> they then behave as if the declarations were:

>     struct { int n; double d[1]; } *s1, *s2;

> and:

>     double *dp;
>     dp = &(s1->d[0]); // valid
>     *dp = 42;         // valid
>     dp = &(s2->d[0]); // valid
>     *dp = 42;         // undefined behavior

> ¶20 The assignment:

>     *s1 = *s2;

> only copies the member n and not any of the array elements. Similarly:

>     struct s t1 = { 0 };          // valid
>     struct s t2 = { 2 };          // valid
>     struct ss tt = { 1, { 4.2 }}; // valid
>     struct s t3 = { 1, { 4.2 }};  // invalid: there is nothing for the 4.2 to initialize
>     t1.n = 4;                     // valid
>     t1.d[0] = 4.2;                // undefined behavior

This material was removed in C11.
The change was not noted and did not need to be noted in TC2 because the
examples are not normative.
But the rewritten material in C11 is informative when studied.

### N983 paper identifying a problem with flexible array members

[N983](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n983.htm)
from the WG14 [Pre-Santa Cruz-2002
mailing](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/pre-SantaCruz-2002.htm)
is the initial statement of a defect report.
It states that some C compilers (citing three) manage to put a FAM
before the padding at the end of a structure.

As I understand it, this report led to the change in TC2, though I have not traced
all the steps in the process.
It appears that the DR is no longer available separately.

TC2 used the wording found in the C11 standard in the normative material.

### C11 standard on flexible array members

So, what does the C11 standard have to say about flexible array members?

> §6.7.2.1 Structure and union specifiers

> ¶3 A structure or union shall not contain a member with incomplete or
> function type (hence, a structure shall not contain an instance of
> itself, but may contain a pointer to an instance of itself), except
> that the last member of a structure with more than one named member
> may have incomplete array type; such a structure (and any union
> containing, possibly recursively, a member that is such a structure)
> shall not be a member of a structure or an element of an array.

This firmly positions the FAM at the end of the structure — 'the last
member' is by definition at the end of the structure, and this is
confirmed by:

> ¶15 Within a structure object, the non-bit-field members and the
> units in which bit-fields reside have addresses that increase in the
> order in which they are declared.

> ¶17 There may be unnamed padding at the end of a structure or union.

> ¶18 As a special case, the last element of a structure with more than
> one named member may have an incomplete array type; this is called a
> _flexible array member_.
> In most situations, the flexible array member is ignored.
> In particular, the size of the structure is as if the flexible array
> member were omitted except that it may have more trailing padding than
> the omission would imply.
> However, when a `.` (or `->`) operator has a left operand that is (a
> pointer to) a structure with a flexible array member and the right
> operand names that member, it behaves as if that member were replaced
> with the longest array (with the same element type) that would not
> make the structure larger than the object being accessed; the offset
> of the array shall remain that of the flexible array member, even if
> this would differ from that of the replacement array.
> If this array would have no elements, it behaves as if it had one
> element but the behavior is undefined if any attempt is made to access
> that element or to generate a pointer one past it.

This paragraph contains the change in ¶20 of ISO/IEC
9899:1999/Cor.2:2004(E) — the TC2 for C99;

The data at the end of the main part of a structure containing a
flexible array member is regular trailing padding that can occur with
any structure type.
Such padding can't be accessed legitimately, but can be passed to
library functions etc via pointers to the structure without incurring
undefined behaviour.

The C11 standard contains three examples, but the first and third are
related to anonymous structures and unions rather than the mechanics of
flexible array members.
Remember, examples are not 'normative', but they are illustrative.

> ¶20 EXAMPLE 2 After the declaration:

>     struct s { int n; double d[]; };

> the structure `struct s` has a flexible array member `d`.
> A typical way to use this is:

>     int m = /* some value */;
>     struct s *p = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + sizeof (double [m]));

> and assuming that the call to `malloc` succeeds, the object pointed to
> by `p` behaves, for most purposes, as if `p` had been declared as:

>     struct { int n; double d[m]; } *p;

> (there are circumstances in which this equivalence is broken; in
> particular, the offsets of member `d` might not be the same).

> ¶21 Following the above declaration:

>     struct s t1 = { 0 };          // valid
>     struct s t2 = { 1, { 4.2 }};  // invalid
>     t1.n = 4;                     // valid
>     t1.d[0] = 4.2;                // might be undefined behavior

> The initialization of `t2` is invalid (and violates a constraint)
> because `struct s` is treated as if it did not contain member `d`.
> The assignment to `t1.d[0]` is probably undefined behavior, but it is
> possible that

>     sizeof (struct s) >= offsetof(struct s, d) + sizeof (double)

> in which case the assignment would be legitimate.
> Nevertheless, it cannot appear in strictly conforming code.

> ¶22 After the further declaration:

>     struct ss { int n; };

> the expressions:

>     sizeof (struct s) >= sizeof (struct ss)
>     sizeof (struct s) >= offsetof(struct s, d)

> are always equal to 1.

> ¶23 If `sizeof (double)` is 8, then after the following code is executed:

>     struct s *s1;
>     struct s *s2;
>     s1 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 64);
>     s2 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 46);

> and assuming that the calls to `malloc` succeed, the objects pointed
> to by `s1` and `s2` behave, for most purposes, as if the identifiers
> had been declared as:

>     struct { int n; double d[8]; } *s1;
>     struct { int n; double d[5]; } *s2;

> ¶24 Following the further successful assignments:

>     s1 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 10);
>     s2 = malloc(sizeof (struct s) + 6);

> they then behave as if the declarations were:

>     struct { int n; double d[1]; } *s1, *s2;

> and:

>     double *dp;
>     dp = &(s1->d[0]); // valid
>     *dp = 42;         // valid
>     dp = &(s2->d[0]); // valid
>     *dp = 42;         // undefined behavior

> ¶25 The assignment:

>     *s1 = *s2;

> only copies the member `n`; if any of the array elements are within
> the first `sizeof (struct s)` bytes of the structure, they might be
> copied or simply overwritten with indeterminate values.

Note that this changed between C99 and C11.

Another part of the standard describes this copying behaviour:

> §6.2.6 Representation of types
> §6.2.6.1 General

> ¶6 When a value is stored in an object of structure or union type,
> including in a member object, the bytes of the object representation
> that correspond to any padding bytes take unspecified
> values.<sup>51)</sup> The value of a structure or union object is
> never a trap representation, even though the value of a member of the
> structure or union object may be a trap representation.

> <sup>51)</sup> Thus, for example, structure assignment need not copy
> any padding bits.


<!--

In the [C chat room](https://chat.stackoverflow.com/rooms/54304/c),
I [wrote](https://chat.stackoverflow.com/transcript/message/37895451#37895451) some
information of which this is a paraphrase:

Consider:

    struct fam1 { double d; char c; char fam[]; };

Assuming double requires 8-byte alignment (or 4-byte; it doesn't matter
too much, but I'll stick with 8), then `struct non_fam1a { double d;
char c; };` would have 7 padding bytes after `c` and a size of 16.
Further, `struct non_fam1b { double d; char c; char nonfam[4]; };` would
have 3 bytes padding after the `nonfam` array, and a size of 16.

The suggestion is that the start of `fam` in `struct fam1` can be at offset
9, even though `sizeof(struct fam1)` is 16.
So that the bytes after `c` are not padding (necessarily).

So, for a small enough FAM, the size of the struct plus FAM might still
be less than size of `struct fam`.

The prototypical allocation is:

    struct fam1 *fam = malloc(sizeof(struct fam1) + array_size * sizeof(char));

when the FAM is of type `char` (as in `struct fam1`).
That's a (gross) over-estimate when the offset of fam is less than
`sizeof(struct fam1)`.

[Dror K.](https://chat.stackoverflow.com/users/3700476/dror-k) [pointed
out](https://chat.stackoverflow.com/transcript/message/37895608#37895608):

> There are macros out there for calculating the 'precise' required storage
based on FAM offsets that are less than the sizeof the structure.
Such as this one: https://gustedt.wordpress.com/2011/03/14/flexible-array-member/

-->

### Addressing the question

The question asks:

> 1. By using flexible array members (FAMs) within structure types, are
>    we exposing our programs to the possibility of undefined behavior?
> 2. Is it possible for a program to use FAMs and still be a strictly
>    conforming program?
> 3. Is the offset of the flexible array member required to be at the
>    end of the struct?

> The questions apply to both C99 (TC3) and C11 (TC1).

I believe that if you code correctly, the answers are "No", "Yes", "No and Yes, depending …".

**Question 1**

I am assuming that the intent of question 1 is "must your program
inevitably be exposed to undefined behaviour if you use any FAM
anywhere?"
To state what I think is obvious: there are lots of ways of exposing a
program to undefined behaviour (and some of those ways involve
structures with flexible array members).

I do not think that simply using a FAM means that the program
automatically has (invokes, is exposed to) undefined behaviour.

**Question 2**

Section §4 **Conformance** defines:

> ¶5 A _strictly conforming program_ shall use only those features of
> the language and library specified in this International
> Standard.<sup>3)</sup>
> It shall not produce output dependent on any unspecified, undefined,
> or implementation-defined behavior, and shall not exceed any minimum
> implementation limit.

> <sup>3)</sup> A strictly conforming program can use conditional
> features (see 6.10.8.3) provided the use is guarded by an appropriate
> conditional inclusion preprocessing directive using the related macro.
> …

> ¶7 A _conforming program_ is one that is acceptable to a conforming
> implementation.<sup>5)</sup>.

> <sup>5)</sup> Strictly conforming programs are intended to be
> maximally portable among conforming implementations.
> Conforming programs may depend upon nonportable features of a
> conforming implementation.

I don't think there are any features of standard C which, if used in the
way that the standard intends, makes the program not strictly
conforming.
If there are any such, they are related to locale-dependent behaviour.
The behaviour of FAM code is not inherently locale-dependent.

I do not think that the use of a FAM inherently means that the program
is not strictly conforming.

**Question 3**

I think question 3 is ambiguous between:

* 3A: Is the offset of the flexible array member required to be equal to
   the size of the structure containing the flexible array member?
* 3B: Is the offset of the flexible array member required to be greater
   than the offset of any prior member of the structure?

The answer to 3A is "No" (witness the C11 example at ¶25, quoted above).

The answer to 3B is "Yes" (witness §6.7.2.1 ¶15, quoted above).

### Dissenting from Dror's answer

I need to quote the C standard and Dror's answer.  I'll use `[DK]` to indicate the
start of a quote from Dror's answer, and unmarked quotations are from the C standard.

As of 2017-07-01 18:00 -08:00, the [short answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/44745678/15168)
by Dror K said:

> `[DK]`

> 1.  Yes.  Common conventions of using FAMs expose our programs to the
> possibility of undefined behavior.  Having said that, I'm unaware of
> any existing conforming implementation that would misbehave.

I'm not convinced that simply using a FAM means that the program
automatically has undefined behaviour.

> `[DK]`

> 2.  Possible, but unlikely.  Even if we don't actually reach undefined
> behavior, we are still likely to fail strict conformance.

I'm not convinced that the use of a FAM automatically renders a program
not strictly conforming.

> `[DK]`

> 3.  No.  The offset of the FAM is not required to be at the end of the
> struct, it may overlay any trailing padding bytes.

This is the answer to my interpretation 3A, and I agree with this.

The long answer contains interpretation of the short answers above.

> `[DK]`

> The problem was that common C99 implementations, such as GCC, didn't
> follow the requirement of the standard, and allowed the FAM to overlay
> any trailing padding bytes.  Their approach was considered to be more
> efficient, and since for them to follow the requirement of the
> standard- would result with breaking backwards compatibility, the
> committee chose to change the specification, and as of C99 TC2 (Nov
> 2004) the standard no longer required the offset of the FAM to be at
> the end of the struct.

I agree with this analysis.

> `[DK]`

> The new specification removed the statement that required the offset
> of the FAM to be at the end of the struct, and it introduced a very
> unfortunate consequence, because the standard gives the implementation
> the liberty not to keep the values of any padding bytes within
> structures or unions in a consistent state.

I agree that the new specification removed the requirement that the FAM
be stored at an offset greater than or equal to the size of the
structure.

I don't agree that there is a problem with the padding bytes.

The standard explicitly says that structure assignment for a structure
containing a FAM effectively ignores the FAM (§6.7.2.1 ¶18).
It must copy the non-FAM members.
It is explicitly stated that padding bytes need not be copied at all
(§6.2.6.1 ¶6 and footnote 51).
And the Example 2 explicitly states (non-normatively §6.7.2.1 ¶25)
that if the FAM overlaps the space defined by the structure, the data
from the part of the FAM that overlaps with the end of the structure
might or might not be copied.

> `[DK]`

> This means that if any of our FAM elements correspond to (or overlay)
> any trailing padding bytes, upon storing to a member of the struct-
> they (may) take unspecified values.
> We don't even need to ponder whether this applies to a value stored to
> the FAM itself, even the strict interpretation that this only applies
> to members other than the FAM, is damaging enough.

I don't see this as a problem.
Any expectation that you can copy a structure containing a FAM using
structure assignment and have the FAM array copied is is inherently
flawed — the copy leaves the FAM data logically uncopied.
Any program that depends on the FAM data within the scope of the
structure is broken; that is a property of the (flawed) program, not the
standard.

> `[DK]`

>     #include <stdio.h>
>     #include <stdlib.h>
>     #include <stddef.h>
>
>     int main(void) {
>         struct s {
>             size_t len;
>             char pad;
>             int array[];
>         };
>
>         struct s *s = malloc(sizeof *s + sizeof *s->array);
>
>         if (sizeof *s > offsetof(struct s, array)) {
>             s->array[0] = 123;
>             s->len = 1; /* any padding bytes take unspecified values */
>
>             printf("%d\n", s->array[0]); /* indeterminate value */
>         }
>
>         free(s);
>         return 0;
>     }

Ideally, of course, the code would set the named member `pad` to a
determinate value, but that doesn't cause actually cause a problem
since it is never accessed.

I emphatically disagree that the value of `s->array[0]` in the
`printf()` is indeterminate; its value is `123`.

The prior standard quote is (it is the same §6.2.6.1 ¶6 in both C99
and C11, though the footnote number is 42 in C99 and 51 in C11):

> When a value is stored in an object of structure or union type,
> including in a member object, the bytes of the object representation
> that correspond to any padding bytes take unspecified values.

Note that `s->len` is not an assignment to an object of structure or
union type; it is an assignment to an object of type `size_t`.
I think this may be the main source of confusion here.

If the code included:

    struct s *t = malloc(sizeof(*t) + sizeof(t->array[0]));
    *t = *s;
    printf("t->array[0] = %d\n", t->array[0]);

then the value printed is indeed indeterminate.
However, that's because copying a structure with a FAM is not guaranteed
to copy the FAM.
More nearly correct code would be (assuming you add `#include
<string.h>`, of course):

    struct s *t = malloc(sizeof(*t) + sizeof(t->array[0]));
    *t = *s;
    memmmove(t->array, s->array, sizeof(t->array[0]));
    printf("t->array[0] = %d\n", t->array[0]);

Now the value printed is determinate (it is `123`).
Note that the condition on `if (sizeof *s > offsetof(struct s, array))`
is immaterial to my analysis.

Since the rest of the long answer (mainly the section identified by the
heading 'undefined behavior') is based on a false inference about the
possibility of the padding bytes of a structure changing when assigning
to an integer member of a structure, the rest of the discussion does not
need further analysis.

> `[DK]`

> Once we store to a member of the struct, the padding bytes take
> unspecified bytes, and therefore any assumption made about the values
> of the FAM elements that correspond to any trailing padding bytes, is
> now false.
> Which means that any assumption leads to us failing strict
> conformance.

This is based on a false premise; the conclusion is false.

<!--
If a structure with a FAM is copied
The standard never gave any permission to assume anything about the
bytes after the last non-FAM member of the structure, so the statement
that the program is not strictly conformant is probably correct, but the
problem is that the program (or programmer) was making unwarranted
assumptions about what happens when a structure containing a FAM is
copied, not that the standard is flawed.
-->

